." the string declarations are a start to try and make distro independent
.ds DS Arch Linux
.ds PB PKGBUILD
.ds VR 3.0.0
.ds LV 1.0.0
.TH libalpm 3 "Feb 08, 2007" "libalpm version \*(LV" "\*(DS Utilities"
.SH NAME
	libalpm \- Arch Linux Package Management (ALPM) library

.SH SYNOPSIS
For ease of access, the libalpm manual has been split up into several sections.

(TODO) Yes, this man page needs a lot of work. Once we get around to doing good
Doxygen documentation, it will improve. We promise.

.nf
alpm_databases      Database Functions
alpm_interface      Interface Functions
alpm_list           List Functions
alpm_log            Logging Functions
alpm_misc           Miscellaneous Functions
alpm_packages       Package Functions
alpm_sync           Sync Functions
alpm_trans          Transaction Functions
.fi

.SH CONFIGURATION
See
.BR pacman.conf (5)
for more details on configuring \fBlibalpm\fP using the \fBpacman.conf\fP file.

.SH BUGS
Bugs? You must be kidding, there are no bugs in this software. But if we happen
to be wrong, send us an email with as much detail as possible to
<pacman-dev@archlinux.org>.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR pacman (8),
.BR makepkg (8),
.BR pacman.conf (5)

See the Arch Linux website at <http://www.archlinux.org> for more current
information on the distribution and the \fBpacman\fP family of tools.

.SH AUTHORS
.nf
Judd Vinet <jvinet@zeroflux.org>
Aurelien Foret <aurelien@archlinux.org>
Aaron Griffin <aaron@archlinux.org>
Dan McGee <dan@archlinux.org>
.fi

See the 'AUTHORS' file for additional contributors.
